---
title: Mass Murderers and Psychiatric Drugs
date: '2014-09-22T05:30:29Z'
author: PhilHickeyPhD
categories:
- A Behavioral Approach to Mental Disorders
- Psychiatric "spin"
- antidepressants
- violence
tags: []
---

There's an interesting article in the current issue of the National Psychologist written by David Kirschner, PhD, a New York psychologist.  The National Psychologist is a newspaper-type magazine that publishes articles of general interest to psychologists and others working in this field.  Most issues contain a mix of opinion pieces, news, changes in government regulations, etc...

Dr. Kirschner's article is titled <em><a href="http://nationalpsychologist.com/2014/09/mass-shooters-received-only-limited-treatment/102638.html">Mass shooters received only limited treatment</a>.</em><em> </em>

Here are some quotes:
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"As a forensic psychologist, I have tested/evaluated 30 teenage and young adult murderers, and almost all of them had been in some kind of 'treatment,' usually short term and psychoactive drug-oriented, before they killed."</p>
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"After each episode of school killings or other mass shootings, such as the Aurora, Colo., Batman movie murders and Tucson, Ariz., killing of six and wounding of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 12 others, there is a renewed public outcry for early identification and treatment of youths at risk for violence.</p>
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">Sadly however, most of the young people who kill had been in 'treatment,' prior to the violence, albeit with less than successful results."</p>
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"Most of the young murderers I have personally examined had…been in 'treatment' and were using prescribed stimulant/amphetamine type drugs before and during the killing events. These medications did not prevent but instead contributed to the violence by disinhibiting normal, frontal cortex control mechanisms."</p>
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"Prior to the violent event, for which he is currently serving a life without parole sentence, Jeremy [Strolmeyer], an honor student with no history of violence, was misdiagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and 'treated' with nothing more than a bottle of Dexedrine following a brief 20-minute 'cost-effective' psychiatric consultation."</p>
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"And so, despite ongoing congressional debates regarding stricter gun control laws vs. improved access to mental health treatment, our concern should be about the quality of mental health care, not just a societal safety net insuring treatment for all children and young adults. Almost all of them are covered by some type of managed care or insurance company, and the issue is not access to preventive treatment. The real problem, in my opinion, is the quality and competence of therapy for potential violent offenders when insurance companies are the gatekeepers."</p>
Obviously it's a compelling article, particularly Dr. Kirschner's assertion that "almost all" 30 young murderers he has worked with had been in some kind of treatment and <em>had been taking psychiatric drugs</em>.  Dr. Kirschner's call for more competent and more intensive therapy makes sense, but as long as the mental health system is dominated by psychiatrists and psychiatric dogma, it is likely that psychiatric drugs will continue to be the essential ingredient of these interventions.  And as long as this is the case, all that we can reasonably expect is more of the same.

Dr. Kirschner's comments are, of course, anecdotal. But there is an ever-growing body of anecdotal information implicating psychiatric drugs in mass killings and suicides. There is a desperate need for a formal study of this matter, but calls for such studies have been routinely ignored and resisted.

In December 2012, a <a href="https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/launch-federal-investigation-relationship-between-school-shootings-and-psychiatric-drugs/25QgKXBc">petition</a> on the White House "We the People" website calling for the government to initiate such an investigation was removed without explanation, even though it was well on the way to receiving the requisite number of signatures.

And let us not forget what Patrick B. Kwanashie, Assistant Attorney General for the State of Connecticut, said on this matter on August 22, 2013 when he was pressed in a <a href="http://ct-n.com/ctnplayer.asp?odID=9336">freedom of information meeting</a> to release Adam Lanza's history of psychiatric drug use.
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">"…you have to advance reasons that you actually do have a real interest in the…medical records.  The plaintiff, the complainant have not shown any such interest.  The complainant is proposing that they can make generalizations, generalized from one single incident, no matter how the outcome of the use of antidepressants, or the causal link between the use of antidepressants and the kind of violence that took place in Newtown.  You just can’t, that’s not a legitimate use of that information.  You can’t generalize just from one case.  Even if you can conclusively establish that Adam Lanza's murderous actions were caused by antidepressants, you can’t logically from that conclude that others would commit the same actions as a result of taking antidepressants.  So it’s simply not legitimate, and not only is it not the use to which they are proposing to put the information not legitimate, it is harmful, <em>because you can cause a lot of people to stop taking their medications</em>, stop cooperating with their treating physicians, just because of the heinousness of what Adam Lanza did.  As the material, the FDA material that they submitted show, it would take a lot of studies over a long period of time and among, and within various demographic groups to even begin to establish causal links between antidepressants and aggressive actions or suicidal behavior.  And the informed opinion has not quite reached the point to say definitively that there’s a causal link between the use of antidepressants and violent behavior.  Having correlations, there are correlations, but to say there are correlations doesn’t necessarily mean the relationship is causal.  And this is an issue the FDA is still grappling with, and so far it’s been willing to do is ask the drug makers to put warnings on their products and to advise physicians, treating physicians, to follow monitor their patients closely at the beginning of the taking of antidepressants.  So it’s a complex issue, and to pretend that you can just, based on this one case, make recommendations as to how people should make judgment choices is a disservice to the public and illustrates why these types of reports should not be made available, because in the wrong hands they can be the source of mischief." [Emphasis added]</p>
In other words, psychiatric drugs are safe until proven dangerous.  And, apparently, the only acceptable evidence is a large scale, randomized, controlled trial.  But the only group who has the data and the resources to conduct such a trial is psychiatry-pharma!  And meanwhile we should cover up any anecdotal information that might cast the drugs in a bad light - because that might induce people to stop taking them!

<strong>Psychiatric drugs are not medications in any meaningful sense of the term</strong>. Whatever temporary lift they may give people in the short term, is offset by their adverse effects – particularly their contribution to suicides and murder.

Information on this issue is being spun and suppressed by psychiatrists, and by their moneyed collaborators in pharma.  How much longer must this destructive charade continue?